The study area comprised two sections. One section, referred to here as the National Park, was the beach from the entrance to Parque Nacional da Lagoa do Peixe (-31.25295841, -50.90920019) south to the barra (the artificial channel connecting the lagoon to the sea; NEED GRID REFERENCE FOR HERE). The other section, Mostardas Beach, was the extent of beach from the Farol Mostardense lighthouse (-31.24734604, -50.90197975) north until the town of Balneário Mostardense (-31.15498872, -50.8100341). Thus, the two sections comprised X km and Y km each.

Each section was surveyed on alternating days. Beginning at the Farol Mostardense lighthouse I cycled slowly along the beach, above the high tide line to avoid disturbing birds. When I saw a flock (defined as any group of 2 or more individuals) of either study species I began scan sampling at intervals of at least five minutes. Using 10×50 binoculars or a 25-40×65 telescope where necessary, I counted each individual and recorded whether it was actively foraging (searching for or consuming food) or engaged in some other behaviour, such as roosting, preening or vigilance. Individuals of each species were recorded separately, but I recorded whether each flock was single-species or mixed Calidris alba and C. fuscicollis. 

For foraging individuals I recorded the foraging substrate, defined as follows:
—intertidal: the area of wet sediment between the lowest and highest waves;
—sand: the area of dry sand never covered by waves during the scan sample;
—pool: isolated bodies of water above the high-tide line, not connected to the sea by wave action during the survey, but in some cases fed by a stream from inland.
Note that the boundaries between these areas depends in part on the tidal cycle and weather conditions, and therefore had to be assessed during the sampling period by observing the behaviour of the sea. However, in practice the distinction was generally fairly clear, with birds either feeding in areas regularly lapped by waves or close to the dunes, apparently favouring the area of sand compressed by local traffic, which uses the beach as a road.
